---
slug: promoter-elements-transcription-rate
difficulty: medium
topic: Identifying which molecular features of a promoter determine transcription initiation rate
question: |
  You are comparing two promoters that drive expression of the same
  gene in E. coli. Promoter A has a -10 box of <pre>TATAAT</pre> and a -35 box of
  <pre>TTGACA</pre>. Promoter B has a -10 box of <pre>CATAAT</pre> and a -35 box of <pre>TTGACA</pre>.
  Both use sigma-70. Promoter A produces 10x more transcript than
  Promoter B.

  Which explanation best accounts for the difference?
choices:
  A: The single base change in the -10 box reduces sigma factor affinity, lowering RNAP recruitment
  B: The -10 box change alters the mRNA sequence, destabilizing the ribosome binding site
  C: Sigma factor only recognizes the -35 box, so the -10 change has no effect
  D: The -10 mutation changes the protein sequence of the downstream gene
answer: A
explanation: |
  The sigma factor recognizes both the -10 and -35 boxes of the promoter.
  TATAAT is the consensus -10 sequence; a mismatch (CATAAT) reduces
  sigma binding affinity and therefore the rate at which RNA polymerase
  forms a stable open complex. This is a transcriptional control point.
  Option B confuses promoter DNA with the mRNA region that contains the
  RBS. Option C is wrong because sigma binds both boxes. Option D is
  wrong because the promoter is upstream of the coding sequence and is
  not part of the translated region.

---
slug: rbs-sequence-translation-initiation
difficulty: medium
topic: Reasoning about how Shine-Dalgarno sequence complementarity affects translation rate
question: |
  Two constructs encode the same protein but differ only in their
  ribosome binding site (RBS) region. Construct 1 has the Shine-Dalgarno
  sequence <pre>AGGAGG</pre> at position -8 relative to the start codon. Construct 2
  has <pre>ACCACC</pre> at the same position. Both produce identical mRNA levels.

  What is the most likely effect on protein expression?
choices:
  A: Construct 2 produces more protein because ACCACC avoids stalling
  B: Both produce equal protein because the mRNA levels are the same
  C: Construct 1 produces more protein because AGGAGG base-pairs more strongly with 16S rRNA
  D: Construct 2 produces more protein because its SD sequence recruits additional ribosomes
answer: C
explanation: |
  The Shine-Dalgarno sequence works by base-pairing with the anti-SD
  sequence (UCCUCC) on the 3' end of 16S rRNA. AGGAGG is the consensus
  and provides the strongest complementarity. ACCACC has two mismatches,
  greatly reducing base-pairing and therefore translation initiation rate.
  Equal mRNA levels do not guarantee equal protein — translation initiation
  is a separate, independently regulated control point. Option A and D
  have no mechanistic basis; Option B confuses transcription with
  translation.

---
slug: secondary-structure-blocks-translation
difficulty: medium
topic: Understanding how mRNA secondary structure near the start codon can occlude the RBS
question: |
  You design a construct with a strong Shine-Dalgarno sequence and
  optimal spacing to the start codon. However, when you run an RNA
  folding prediction, you find that the SD sequence is sequestered in
  a stable hairpin formed between the SD region and nucleotides
  downstream of the start codon. Protein expression is very low
  despite high mRNA levels.

  What is the most likely cause?
choices:
  A: The hairpin is acting as a Rho-independent terminator, ending transcription early
  B: The hairpin occludes the SD sequence, preventing 30S ribosomal subunit binding
  C: The hairpin changes the codon usage of the downstream CDS
  D: The hairpin causes RNase E to degrade the mRNA before translation can begin
answer: B
explanation: |
  For translation to initiate, the 30S ribosomal subunit must access the
  Shine-Dalgarno sequence to base-pair with 16S rRNA. If the SD is
  trapped in a stable hairpin, the ribosome cannot bind, and translation
  initiation is blocked regardless of how strong the SD sequence would
  be if it were single-stranded. This is why secondary structure in the
  region from roughly -4 to +37 relative to the start codon is a major
  determinant of expression. Option A describes a terminator, which
  requires a hairpin followed by a U-rich tract at a specific location.
  Option C confuses structure with sequence. Option D is possible in
  general but does not explain low protein with high mRNA.

---
slug: steady-state-mrna-levels
difficulty: medium
topic: Reasoning about how synthesis and degradation rates jointly determine steady-state mRNA concentration
question: |
  Two genes are transcribed at the same rate from identical promoters.
  Gene A's mRNA has a half-life of 2 minutes, while Gene B's mRNA has
  a half-life of 20 minutes. Both are measured at steady state.

  What is the expected relationship between their mRNA levels?
choices:
  A: Gene A has ~10x more mRNA because faster turnover means faster production
  B: Gene B has ~10x more mRNA because it persists longer before being degraded
  C: Both have equal mRNA levels because they have the same transcription rate
  D: Gene A has more mRNA because short-lived mRNAs are preferentially stabilized by ribosomes
answer: B
explanation: |
  At steady state, mRNA level is proportional to the synthesis rate
  divided by the degradation rate. Since both genes have the same
  transcription rate but Gene B's mRNA is degraded 10x more slowly
  (half-life 20 min vs 2 min), Gene B accumulates roughly 10x more
  mRNA. This is a fundamental principle: steady-state concentration
  depends on both production and destruction. Option A reverses the
  relationship. Option C ignores degradation entirely. Option D has
  no biological basis.

---
slug: codon-usage-expression-variation
difficulty: medium
topic: Understanding how synonymous codon choice affects protein expression independently of regulation
question: |
  Two constructs encode the exact same GFP protein with identical
  promoters, RBS sequences, and terminators. The only difference is
  that Construct 1 uses codons abundant in E. coli, while Construct 2
  uses rare codons throughout the CDS. Construct 1 produces 100x more
  fluorescence.

  Which statement best explains this result?
choices:
  A: Rare codons change the amino acid sequence, producing a nonfunctional protein
  B: Rare codons slow ribosome elongation, reducing the rate of completed protein and potentially destabilizing the mRNA
  C: Rare codons prevent transcription by blocking RNA polymerase
  D: Rare codons change the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, blocking translation initiation
answer: B
explanation: |
  Synonymous codons encode the same amino acid, so the protein sequence
  is unchanged (ruling out A). Rare codons correspond to low-abundance
  tRNAs, causing ribosome stalling during elongation. This reduces the
  rate at which completed proteins are produced and can also expose the
  mRNA to degradation. Studies like Plotkin's GFP codon variation work
  show up to a 250-fold range in expression from codon choice alone.
  Option C is wrong because RNAP transcribes DNA without regard to codon
  identity. Option D is wrong because the RBS region is in the 5' UTR,
  not the CDS.

---
slug: rbs-swap-what-changes
difficulty: medium
topic: Distinguishing which molecular properties change vs. remain constant when an RBS part is swapped
question: |
  You are tuning expression of an enzyme in a metabolic pathway. You
  swap the RBS in your construct from a strong RBS (high translation
  initiation rate) to a weak RBS (low translation initiation rate).
  The CDS, promoter, and terminator remain unchanged.

  Which of the following changes as a result of this swap?
choices:
  A: The amino acid sequence of the enzyme
  B: The metabolite concentrations in the pathway
  C: The post-translational modifications of the enzyme
  D: The enzymatic activity per molecule of protein
answer: B
explanation: |
  Swapping the RBS changes the translation initiation rate, which changes
  the amount of enzyme produced. Less enzyme means the pathway's metabolic
  flux changes, altering metabolite concentrations. Critically, the RBS
  is in the 5' UTR and does not affect the coding sequence, so the amino
  acid sequence (A), protein function per molecule (D), and post-
  translational modifications (C) are all unchanged. This is a key
  principle in genetic design: the RBS tunes how much protein is made,
  not what the protein is.

---
slug: transcriptional-vs-translational-control
difficulty: medium
topic: Classifying genetic parts by whether they act at the transcriptional or translational level
question: |
  A student is debugging a construct that produces no detectable protein.
  They measure mRNA and find abundant transcript. They then check the
  5' UTR and find the Shine-Dalgarno sequence has been deleted.

  At which level of gene expression is the problem?
choices:
  A: Transcriptional — the promoter is not recruiting RNA polymerase
  B: Translational — without an SD sequence, ribosomes cannot initiate translation on the mRNA
  C: Post-translational — the protein is being degraded immediately after synthesis
  D: Transcriptional — without the SD, RNA polymerase cannot terminate properly
answer: B
explanation: |
  The presence of abundant mRNA rules out a transcriptional defect — the
  promoter is working fine and the transcript is stable. The Shine-
  Dalgarno sequence is required for 30S ribosomal subunit recruitment
  to the mRNA. Without it, translation cannot initiate, so no protein
  is made despite plentiful mRNA. This is a purely translational
  control point. Option A is contradicted by the mRNA data. Option C
  requires protein to have been made first. Option D confuses the SD
  with the terminator.

---
slug: same-protein-different-cds-expression
difficulty: medium
topic: Explaining why identical proteins can have different expression levels from different DNA encodings
question: |
  A lab orders two synthetic genes encoding the identical lysozyme
  protein. Gene version 1 is codon-optimized for E. coli. Gene version 2
  uses the original bacteriophage codon usage. Both are cloned into the
  same vector with the same promoter, RBS, and terminator. Version 1
  produces 50x more lysozyme.

  What is the BEST explanation for why two DNA sequences encoding the
  same protein yield such different expression levels?
choices:
  A: The different DNA sequences produce different amino acid sequences
  B: The different codons result in different mRNA sequences, affecting secondary structure near the start codon and ribosome elongation rate
  C: Codon-optimized genes have stronger promoters
  D: The bacteriophage version has a weaker Shine-Dalgarno sequence
answer: B
explanation: |
  Synonymous codons change the mRNA nucleotide sequence without changing
  the protein. This affects two things: (1) secondary structure in the
  region around the start codon (-4 to +37), which can occlude the RBS
  and impair translation initiation, and (2) elongation rate, since rare
  codons correspond to scarce tRNAs. Together these mechanisms explain
  large expression differences. Option A is wrong because synonymous
  codons encode the same amino acids. Option C is wrong because both
  use the same promoter. Option D is wrong because both use the same
  RBS — the SD sequence is in the 5' UTR, not the CDS.

---
slug: terminator-transcript-boundary
difficulty: medium
topic: Understanding how terminators define the 3' boundary of a transcript and prevent read-through
question: |
  An operon contains Gene A followed by Gene B, each with its own RBS
  and start codon. A strong Rho-independent terminator is placed between
  Gene A and Gene B. When the terminator is present, Gene B protein
  levels are very low. When the terminator is removed, Gene B is
  expressed at high levels from the same promoter driving Gene A.

  What role is the terminator playing?
choices:
  A: The terminator is degrading Gene B's protein after it is translated
  B: The terminator hairpin is blocking the ribosome from reaching Gene B's start codon
  C: The terminator causes RNA polymerase to dissociate before it can transcribe Gene B, so Gene B has no mRNA
  D: The terminator changes the reading frame of Gene B
answer: C
explanation: |
  A Rho-independent terminator forms a stable hairpin followed by a
  U-rich tract in the nascent RNA, causing RNA polymerase to dissociate
  from the DNA template. When placed between Gene A and Gene B, it
  prevents transcriptional read-through, so Gene B is not transcribed
  and produces no mRNA. Removing the terminator allows RNAP to continue
  through Gene B, creating a polycistronic mRNA from which Gene B can
  be translated using its own RBS. Option A confuses transcription with
  protein degradation. Option B confuses the terminator with RBS
  occlusion. Option D has no mechanistic basis.

---
slug: rna-stability-expression-level
difficulty: medium
topic: Reasoning about how RNA degradation rate contributes to steady-state protein expression
question: |
  You are engineering a biosensor where the output protein must respond
  quickly to the disappearance of an inducer signal. You want protein
  levels to drop rapidly when transcription stops.

  Which design strategy would MOST help achieve fast signal decay?
choices:
  A: Use a very stable mRNA with no RNase E cleavage sites so that translation continues efficiently
  B: Engineer the mRNA to contain RNase E cleavage sites and use a protein degradation tag, so both mRNA and protein turn over rapidly
  C: Use the strongest possible RBS to maximize translation before the mRNA is degraded
  D: Remove the terminator so that read-through transcription produces more mRNA
answer: B
explanation: |
  Rapid signal decay requires that both the mRNA and the protein are
  cleared quickly once transcription stops. If the mRNA is stable (A),
  it continues to be translated long after the signal is gone, creating
  a slow response. Adding RNase E sites destabilizes the mRNA so it is
  degraded quickly, and a protein degradation tag (e.g., ssrA tag)
  ensures existing protein is actively destroyed. Option C increases
  peak expression but does nothing for decay kinetics. Option D would
  increase mRNA production, the opposite of what is needed. At steady
  state, expression = synthesis - degradation, so tuning degradation
  rates of both mRNA and protein is essential for temporal control.
